CBS presents this program in color.
From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center,
home of the world's greatest musical
events -- another program of NEW YORK
PHILHARMONIC Young People's Concerts
under the musical direction of Leonard
Bernstein,
Brought to you by ---
And here is Leonard Bernstein.
My dear young friends: On our last program,
if you recall, we were celebrating the
double anniversary of our New York
Philharmonic and the Vienna Philharmonik
- both 125 years old. Well, we are
still celebrating it - only this time in a
very special way - by playing Beethoven.
Now what, you will ask, has Beethoven got
to do with our anniversary? A lot; and I'll
tell you why. I have been looking at the
opening programs played by both
orchestras back there in 1842, and I
found one striking similarity between
them: the name of Beethoven is
all over the place.
He had the market cornered,
a mere fifteen years after his death.
SKIPPED
For example, looking at the New York program, we find that out of the 8 pieces played two were by Beethoven - and that includes a whole symphony and a long aria from his opera, Fidelio, - making almost an hour of Beethoven alone! The Vienna program went even further:
Vienna Program 1842 out of the 8 pieces they played 4 were by Beethoven - half of the program -including again, a whole symphony, two overtures and another long aria - well over an hour of Beethoven. A little simple arithmetic shows us that out of the 16 pieces played by both orchestras, 6 were by Beethoven - 6 out of 16, which means that if these programs were typical of their time (and they were) a fat, solid 38% of all symphonic music played in 1842 was by Beethoven.
But what's even more remarkable is that
that 38% still holds today.
SKIPPED
(That percentage has gone up to )
He still has the market cornered. Today an all-
Beethoven concert is a very frequent
happening. And what is the main
piece on every piano recital? A Beethoven
sonata. And during the last World War,
what was our musical symbol for victory?
Pah-pah-pah-PAH.
Beethoven's Fifth.
And when a great man dies, what do we play?
The funeral march from Beethoven's
Eroica. And on United Nations Day, or
Brotherhood week, or whatever,
what is the inevitable piece of
music? Beethoven's Ninth. Why, even the
Beatles featured it in their film "Help."
And look at Schroeder in Peanuts: To him
Beethoven's birthday is more important
than the 4th of July.
It's Beethoven, Beethoven, forever
Beethoven - a name that's almost become
a synonym for music itself. And who was
this giant with the magic name?
He was s short, stubby fellow, not Viennese
at all, not even Austrian, but German, from
the town of Bonn on the Rhine River,
where he was born in 1770.
At the age of 22 he
was sent to Vienna by the local big-shots of
his home town,
since Vienna was the place for music -
for studying and making a career.
And so this little provincial chap with bad
skin and a comedy accent from the
Rhineland arrived in Vienna, knocked
everyone dead, and was taken up by the
Viennese nobility and made a hero.
His fame spread, and he soon dominated the musical scene,
which he has dominated ever
since - the mighty, the colossal, the
profound, the revolutionary, the mystic,
romantic Beethoven.
He was also bad-tempered,
stubborn, ill-mannered, opinionated,
moody, and miserly. But out of this homely
human vessel,
a voice spoke that was
more than human - a voice with the ring and the
conviction of something eternal,
something that still today makes us
tingle with the certainty that a
divine spark exists in every one of us.
Now why should this be? I've been trying all
my life to find out. The very first
television program I ever did was
about Beethoven. The very
first chapter of my first book is called
"Why Beethoven?" Well, I'm still asking that
question, and will probably never find a
total answer. Mighty, colossal - those words
just don't explain anything. Because the
final answer is a mystery - the mystery of
why this one particular
shaggy-headed little man should have
been chosen to wallop the galaxies with his music.
And so we shall have an all-Beethoven
program today, beginning, as we began
125 years ago, with those four heaven-
storming notes that announce the first
movement of his Fifth Symphony."
Did you grasp
the fantastic shape of that movement? The perfect
definition, the exactness, of starts and
stops, of holding back and plunging ahead,
of the sudden mysterious drops and the
wild eruptions? Every split-second is
measured and molded by a master.
And apropos of this shaping,
there is an important thing that needs to
be said, and I'm going to
run the risk of boring you
with a tiny lecture in order to try to say it. You've
probably heard of a popular biography of
Beethoven called "The Man Who Freed Music."
Now this title has always caused me a
certain disquiet. What does it
mean? Freed music from what? From Bach?
From Nozart? Haydn? Well hardly:
they all had plenty of freedom of their
own. The truth is that all great composers
free music - not from the bondage of other
composers, but from routine, from
mediocrity, from second-rate, dusty
tradition; in other words, a great
composer frees music from the
predictable. Take one of Beethoven's
most obvious examples of the
unpredictable - the opening tune of
his third Symphony, the Eroica.
It rides along in E-b major on
the nice, expected notes of the tonic
triad for four bars,
and then, on the fifth bar, the unexpected happens:
Bang! - That D-b! Surprise: the bondage of
the Triad is broken. Music is freed. But
freed by what? By a Db- and that's
just the point:
a Db, not a Cb or an A
but that one, chosen, limited note,
Db-that did the freeing.
Doesn't this tell us something very important
about the nature of freedom? Obviously
freedom must carry with it the meaning
of freedom to limit oneself, and one's
material. Freedom is not infinite, not
boundless liberty, as some hippies like
to think - do anything you want, any time,
anywhere you want to. No, freedom
means being free to make
decisions, to determine one's course.
But decision means choice;
and choice is impossible without
rejection. Can you understand that?
You can't choose something without
rejecting all the other things you
haven't chosen. If you choose one
apple out of a dozen, you automatically
unchoose the other eleven, and if Beethoven
chooses that one D-Flat, he automatically
un-chooses all the other eleven notes.
So you see, real freedom must contain
within itself the freedom to un-choose,
to censor oneself, to limit
oneself. That is the whole meaning of
democracy, the kind of freedom on which
we base our hopes for a peaceful world -
just as it is the meaning of freedom in
great musical invention. In Beethoven,
as in democracy, freedom is a discipline,
combining the right to choose freely,
and the gift of choosing wisely. Now do
you see what I mean by Beethoven's
masterly shaping of that movement? I hope so! End
of lecture. Now we are going to hear
more of that great free discipline in
action - the last two movements of
Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto.
This performance is made even more important by the fact that we will have as our piano soloist a young artist who has the depth and power
to match this music - a 21-year old
Israeli named Jospeph Kalichstein.
Ordinarily we present our young artists on one special Young Performers' program - but this young man is of such talent as to justify his appearing on a program about Beethoven. Can there be any greater praise?
He will be accompanied by one of our young
assistant conductors, - Paul Capolongo,
a very gifted young Frenchman, born in Algiers.
And here they are —
KALICHSTEIN	Joseph Kalichstein and Paul Capolongo.
We have
been talking about the connection
between Beethoven and freedom;
and nowhere is that connection more evident
than in Beethoven's opera Fidelio.
This was the only opera Beethoven ever wrote,
but he wrote it and rewrote it and
rewrote it over a period of twelve years.
This, of course, was typical, of Beethoven
in his search for perfection; all his
works went through long agonies of
rewriting and scratching out and trying
again -that was the price he paid for his
freedom, the price of free choice - to make
the exactly right choice. But, with his
opera Fidelio the agony was even worse,
and I think one of the main reasons was
that the story of the opera deals with
the very subject of freedom itself.
The hero of the story is a young Spaniard named Florestan,
who has been unjustly imprisoned for
speaking out freely against tyranny.
The whole opera takes place in the prison where the villainous governor Don Pizzaro has Florestan locked in a dungeon, planning eventually to have him killed.
Florestan's faithful wife,
Leonore, has managed to sneak into the
prison disguised as a boy, and gets a job
as the jailor's assistant so that she can
help her husband escape. That is the basic plot of the opera.
SKIPPED
And toward the end there is a glorious exciting moment when FIorestan is rescued just as he is about to be killed:	we suddenly hear the far-off
trumpet-call that announces the arrival of the rescue-party; there is a race against time, but the trumpet-call comes nearer, and finally all is saved - freedom triumphs and injustice is punished.
Now why is this opera called Fidelio?
Because that is the name Leonore takes
in her disguise as a boy. And even here
Beethoven wrestled with
his freedoms of choice:	The opera was
first called Fidelio and then changed to
Leonore and then back
to Fidelio. And the overture to the opera
most clearly of all reflects the agony
of free choices:
there are not one but four overtures to this opera.
The original one was called, peculiarly enough, Overture to Leonora. But Beethoven was not satisfied with it, and wrote a second Leonore Overture - and then, believe it or not, a whole new third one - Leonore #3.
As if that weren't enough exercise in unchoosing, he finally wound up with a fourth overture, known as the Overture to Fidelio.
Out of all four, it is the 3rd Leonore Overture that
is the masterpiece, and the one we are
going to play now. It is a massive work -
more than just an overture, rather
like a great symphonic poem
describing the whole opera. During its slow
introduction we feel the heavy, brooding
atmosphere of Florestan's dungeon,
then, when the main fast section begins,
we hear the gradually rising hope of
rescue surging up through the orchestra,
and the excitement is made even more
dramatic by alternating with moods of
prayer and of love music. At the climax
the orchestra is suddenly cut off, and the
famous trumpet-call of liberation sounds
in the distance
(You'11 hear it
coming from somewhere backstage):
Then there is a moment of hushed
suspense, then again the trumpet-call, nearer this
time, and finally the triumphant
achievement of freedom, in a coda of
brilliant celebration. As you listen now to
this essay on liberty, you can
understand why Beethoven has always
meant so much to us.
As long as the human race struggles for
freedom.
SKIPPED
- and it's a long struggle - Beethoven's music will be our watchword.
The Young People's Concerts has been brought to you by -----------